[Chapter 15]
  15.1) The select system call is used to
    A. block on input from several file descriptors at once
    B. connect two file descriptors

  15.2) The select system call returns 0 if
    A. the timeout value is reached
    B. it detects end of file on a file descriptor

  15.3) A program can create a named pipe by calling
    A. pipe
    B. mkfifo

  15.4) A named pipe is removed with the system call
    A. close
    B. unlink

  15.5) A process cannot open a named pipe for reading until
    A. a process opens the pipe for writing
    B. a process writes data into the pipe

  15.6) If two different processes read from the same pipe,
    A. one will get some data, the other will get the rest
    B. both will read the same data

  15.7) If two different processes read from the same file,
    A. one will get some data, the other will get the rest
    B. both will read the same data

  15.8) If two different processes write to the same pipe,
    A. data from one writer may overwrite data from the other one
    B. both sets of messages will get to the reader

  15.9) A shared memory segment is created by using
    A. shmget
    B. open

  15.10) A program deletes a shared memory segment by using
    A. shmdt
    B. shmctl

  15.11) Shared memory is faster for communication than pipes because
    A. data does not have to be copied from one process to another
    B. the kernel stores shared memory segments in the CPU cache

  15.12) The number of simultaneous read locks processes may set on a file region
    A. may never be more than one 
    B. may exceed one

  15.13) The number of simultaneous write locks processes may set on a file region
    A. may exceed one
    B. may never be more than one

  15.14) A process may set a write lock on a file region
    A. if there are read locks on the region
    B. only when there are no read or write locks on the region

  15.15) A semaphore is
    A. a global variable that different processes may use
    B. created by the signal function

  15.16) The kernel ensures that the value of a semaphore will
    A. never be negative
    B. never exceed a certain value

  15.17) Processes use semaphores
    A. to send small integer values to each other
    B. to coordinate access to shared resources

  15.18) The Unix kernel
    A. is an I/O multiplexor
    B. prevents programmers from erasing files

