[Chapter 13]
  13.1) Software vendors provide hardware keys to
    A. protect user data from intruders
    B. prevent unauthorized use of their programs

  13.2) Managing company cars is similar to managing software licenses because
    A. both involve sharing a fixed number of items among several users
    B. you have to pay for a new one in case of a crash

  13.3) The major difference between datagram sockets and stream sockets is
    A. datagram sockets are not connected
    B. stream sockets are not reliable

  13.4) An advantage of datagram sockets over stream sockets is
    A. they do not require socket addresses
    B. they require less work from the network software

  13.5) A server uses the address argument to the recvfrom system call to
    A. specify which clients may send it messages
    B. be told which client sent a message

  13.6) The sendto system call does not use a return address argument
    A. because the network software adds the address of the socket
    B. so some clients can remain anonymous

  13.7) Datagram sockets would be a good choice for transmitting
    A. automated teller machine transactions
    B. background music for elevators

  13.8) The client should check the address in the do_transaction function
    A. to make sure the datagram is complete
    B. to make sure the datagram comes from the server

  13.9) If a client crashes before it returns its ticket
    A. the server will have an incorrect count of running programs
    B. the server will receive SIGCHLD

  13.10) The server checks if a client is still active by
    A. sending a datagram to the client
    B. sending signal 0 to the client

  13.11) A client cannot give its ticket to another process because
    A. the protocol specifies that clients talk only to the server
    B. a process may only send datagrams to a related process

  13.12) Ticket validation is a technique used to
    A. prevent clients from crashing
    B. recover data if the server crashes

  13.13) A socket with an address in the Unix domain
    A. can be reached by clients on any Unix machine
    B. can only be reached by clients on the same machine

